# Letter from Birmingham Jail Martin Luther King
http://www.mlkonline.net/jail.html

Birmingham City Jail April 16, 1963

My dear Fellow Clergymen,

While confined here in the Birmingham City Jail, I came across your
recent statement calling our present activities "unwise and untimely."
Seldom, if ever, do I pause to answer criticism of my work and ideas. If
I sought to answer all the criticisms that cross my desk, my secretaries
would be engaged in little else in the course of the day and I would
have no time for constructive work. But since I feel that you are men of
genuine goodwill and your criticisms are sincerely set forth, I would
like to answer your statement in what I hope will be patient and
reasonable terms.

I think I should give the reason for my being in Birmingham, since you
have been influenced by the argument of "outsiders coming in." I have
the honor of serving as president of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, an organization operating in every Southern state with
headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. We have some eighty-five affiliate
organizations all across the South -- one being the Alabama Christian
Movement for Human Rights. Whenever necessary and possible we share
staff, educational, and financial resources with our affiliates. Several
months ago our local affiliate here in Birmingham invited us to be on
call to engage in a nonviolent direct action program if such were deemed
necessary. We readily consented and when the hour came we lived up to
our promises. So I am here, along with several members of my staff,
because we were invited here. I am here because I have basic
organizational ties here. Beyond this, I am in Birmingham because
injustice is here. Just as the eighth century prophets left their little
villages and carried their "thus saith the Lord" far beyond the
boundaries of their home town, and just as the Apostle Paul left his
little village of Tarsus and carried the gospel of Jesus Christ to
practically every hamlet and city of the Graeco-Roman world, I too am
compelled to carry the gospel of freedom beyond my particular home town.
Like Paul, I must constantly respond to the Macedonian call for aid.

Moreover, I am cognizant of the interrelatedness of all communities and
states. I cannot sit idly by in Atlanta and not be concerned about what
happens in Birmingham. Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice
everywhere. We are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality tied in
a single garment of destiny. Whatever affects one directly affects all
indirectly. Never again can we afford to live with the narrow,
provincial "outside agitator" idea. Anyone who lives inside the United
States can never be considered an outsider anywhere in this country.

You deplore the demonstrations that are presently taking place in
Birmingham. But I am sorry that your statement did not express a similar
concern for the conditions that brought the demonstrations into being.
I am sure that each of you would want to go beyond the superficial
social analyst who looks merely at effects, and does not grapple with
underlying causes. I would not hesitate to say that it is unfortunate
that so-called demonstrations are taking place in Birmingham at this
time, but I would say in more emphatic terms that it is even more
unfortunate that the white power structure of this city left the Negro
community with no other alternative.

In any nonviolent campaign there are four basic steps: (1) Collection of
the facts to determine whether injustices are alive; (2) Negotiation;
(3) Self-purification; and (4) Direct action. We have gone through all
of these steps in Birmingham. There can be no gainsaying of the fact
that racial injustice engulfs this community. Birmingham is probably the
most thoroughly segregated city in the United States. Its ugly record of
police brutality is known in every section of this country. Its unjust
treatment of Negroes in the courts is a notorious reality. There have
been more unsolved bombings of Negro homes and churches in Birmingham
than any city in this nation. These are the hard, brutal, and
unbelievable facts. On the basis of these conditions Negro leaders
sought to negotiate with the city fathers. But the political leaders
consistently refused to engage in good faith negotiation.

Then came the opportunity last September to talk with some of the
leaders of the economic community. In these negotiating sessions certain
promises were made by the merchants -- such as the promise to remove the
humiliating racial signs from the stores. On the basis of these promises
Rev. Shuttlesworth and the leaders of the Alabama Christian Movement for
Human Rights agreed to call a moratorium on any type of demonstrations.
As the weeks and months unfolded we realized that we were the victims of
a broken promise. The signs remained. As in so many experiences of the
past we were confronted with blasted hopes, and the dark shadow of
a deep disappointment settled upon us. So we had no alternative except
that of preparing for direct action, whereby we would present our very
bodies as a means of laying our case before the conscience of the local
and national community. We were not unmindful of the difficulties
involved. So we decided to go through a process of self-purification. We
started having workshops on nonviolence and repeatedly asked ourselves
the questions, "Are you able to accept blows without retaliating?" "Are
you able to endure the ordeals of jail?"

We decided to set our direct-action program around the Easter season,
realizing that with the exception of Christmas, this was the largest
shopping period of the year. Knowing that a strong economic withdrawal
program would be the by-product of direct action, we felt that this was
the best time to bring pressure on the merchants for the needed changes.
Then it occurred to us that the March election was ahead, and so we
speedily decided to postpone action until after election day. When we
discovered that Mr. Connor was in the run-off, we decided again to
postpone action so that the demonstrations could not be used to cloud
the issues. At this time we agreed to begin our nonviolent witness the
day after the run-off.

This reveals that we did not move irresponsibly into direct action. We
too wanted to see Mr. Connor defeated; so we went through postponement
after postponement to aid in this community need. After this we felt
that direct action could be delayed no longer.

You may well ask, Why direct action? Why sit-ins, marches, etc.? Isn't
negotiation a better path?" You are exactly right in your call for
negotiation. Indeed, this is the purpose of direct action. Nonviolent
direct action seeks to create such a crisis and establish such creative
tension that a community that has constantly refused to negotiate is
forced to confront the issue. It seeks so to dramatize the issue that it
can no longer be ignored. I just referred to the creation of tension as
a part of the work of the nonviolent resister. This may sound rather
shocking. But I must confess that I am not afraid of the word tension.
I have earnestly worked and preached against violent tension, but there
is a type of constructive nonviolent tension that is necessary for
growth. Just as Socrates felt that it was necessary to create a tension
in the mind so that individuals could rise from the bondage of myths and
half-truths to the unfettered realm of creative analysis and objective
appraisal, we must see the need of having nonviolent gadflies to create
the kind of tension in society that will help men rise from the dark
depths of prejudice and racism to the majestic heights of understanding
and brotherhood. So the purpose of the direct action is to create
a situation so crisis-packed that it will inevitably open the door to
negotiation. We, therefore, concur with you in your call for
negotiation. Too long has our beloved Southland been bogged down in the
tragic attempt to live in monologue rather than dialogue.

One of the basic points in your statement is that our acts are untimely.
Some have asked, "Why didn't you give the new administration time to
act?" The only answer that I can give to this inquiry is that the new
administration must be prodded about as much as the outgoing one before
it acts. We will be sadly mistaken if we feel that the election of Mr.
Boutwell will bring the millennium to Birmingham. While Mr. Boutwell is
much more articulate and gentle than Mr. Connor, they are both
segregationists dedicated to the task of maintaining the status quo. The
hope I see in Mr. Boutwell is that he will be reasonable enough to see
the futility of massive resistance to desegregation. But he will not see
this without pressure from the devotees of civil rights. My friends,
I must say to you that we have not made a single gain in civil rights
without determined legal and nonviolent pressure. History is the long
and tragic story of the fact that privileged groups seldom give up their
privileges voluntarily. Individuals may see the moral light and
voluntarily give up their unjust posture; but as Reinhold Niebuhr has
reminded us, groups are more immoral than individuals.

We know through painful experience that freedom is never voluntarily
given by the oppressor; it must be demanded by the oppressed. Frankly
I have never yet engaged in a direct action movement that was "well
timed," according to the timetable of those who have not suffered unduly
from the disease of segregation. For years now I have heard the word
"Wait!" It rings in the ear of every Negro with a piercing familiarity.
This "wait" has almost always meant "never." It has been a tranquilizing
thalidomide, relieving the emotional stress for a moment, only to give
birth to an ill-formed infant of frustration. We must come to see with
the distinguished jurist of yesterday that "justice too long delayed is
justice denied." We have waited for more than three hundred and forty
years for our constitutional and God-given rights. The nations of Asia
and Africa are moving with jet-like speed toward the goal of political
independence, and we still creep at horse and buggy pace toward the
gaining of a cup of coffee at a lunch counter.

I guess it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging darts of
segregation to say wait. But when you have seen vicious mobs lynch your
mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and brothers at whim;
when you have seen hate filled policemen curse, kick, brutalize, and
even kill your black brothers and sisters with impunity; when you see
the vast majority of your twenty million Negro brothers smothering in an
air-tight cage of poverty in the midst of an affluent society; when you
suddenly find your tongue twisted and your speech stammering as you seek
to explain to your six-year-old daughter why she can't go to the public
amusement park that has just been advertised on television, and see
tears welling up in her little eyes when she is told that Funtown is
closed to colored children, and see the depressing clouds of inferiority
begin to form in her little mental sky, and see her begin to distort her
little personality by unconsciously developing a bitterness toward white
people; when you have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old son
asking in agonizing pathos: "Daddy, why do white people treat colored
people so mean?"; when you take a cross-country drive and find it
necessary to sleep night after night in the uncomfortable corners of
your automobile because no motel will accept you; when you are
humiliated day in and day out by nagging signs reading "white" men and
"colored"; when your first name becomes "nigger" and your middle name
becomes "boy" (however old you are) and your last name becomes "John,"
and when your wife and mother are never given the respected title
"Mrs."; when you are harried by day and haunted by night by the fact
that you are a Negro, living constantly at tip-toe stance never quite
knowing what to expect next, and plagued with inner fears and outer
resentments; when you are forever fighting a degenerating sense of
"nobodiness" -- then you will understand why we find it difficult to
wait. There comes a time when the cup of endurance runs over, and men
are no longer willing to be plunged into an abyss of injustice where
they experience the bleakness of corroding despair. I hope, sirs, you
can understand our legitimate and unavoidable impatience.

You express a great deal of anxiety over our willingness to break laws.
This is certainly a legitimate concern. Since we so diligently urge
people to obey the Supreme Court's decision of 1954 outlawing
segregation in the public schools, it is rather strange and paradoxical
to find us consciously breaking laws. One may well ask: "How can you
advocate breaking some laws and obeying others?" The answer is found in
the fact that there are two types of laws: There are just laws and there
are unjust laws. I would be the first to advocate obeying just laws. One
has not only a legal but moral responsibility to obey just laws.
Conversely, one has a moral responsibility to disobey unjust laws.
I would agree with Saint Augustine that "An unjust law is no law at
all."

Now what is the difference between the two? How does one determine when
a law is just or unjust? A just law is a man-made code that squares with
the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of
harmony with the moral law. To put it in the terms of Saint Thomas
Aquinas, an unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal and
natural law. Any law that uplifts human personality is just. Any law
that degrades human personality is unjust. All segregation statutes are
unjust because segregation distorts the soul and damages the
personality. It gives the segregator a false sense of superiority and
the segregated a false sense of inferiority. To use the words of Martin
Buber, the great Jewish philosopher, segregation substitutes an "I-it"
relationship for an "I-thou" relationship, and ends up relegating
persons to the status of things. So segregation is not only politically,
economically, and sociologically unsound, but it is morally wrong and
sinful. Paul Tillich has said that sin is separation. Isn't segregation
an existential expression of man's tragic separation, an expression of
his awful estrangement, his terrible sinfulness? So I can urge men to
obey the1954 decision of the Supreme Court because it is morally right,
and I can urge them to disobey segregation ordinances because they are
morally wrong.

Let us turn to a more concrete example of just and unjust laws. An
unjust law is a code that a majority inflicts on a minority that is not
binding on itself. This is difference made legal. On the other hand
a just law is a code that a majority compels a minority to follow that
it is willing to follow itself. This is sameness made legal.

Let me give another explanation. An unjust law is a code inflicted upon
a minority which that minority had no part in enacting or creating
because they did not have the unhampered right to vote. Who can say that
the legislature of Alabama which set up the segregation laws was
democratically elected? Throughout the state of Alabama all types of
conniving methods are used to prevent Negroes from becoming registered
voters and there are some counties without a single Negro registered to
vote despite the fact that the Negro constitutes a majority of the
population. Can any law set up in such a state be considered
democratically structured?

These are just a few examples of unjust and just laws. There are some
instances when a law is just on its face but unjust in its application.
For instance, I was arrested Friday on a charge of parading without
a permit. Now there is nothing wrong with an ordinance which requires
a permit for a parade, but when the ordinance is used to preserve
segregation and to deny citizens the First Amendment privilege of
peaceful assembly and peaceful protest, then it becomes unjust.

I hope you can see the distinction I am trying to point out. In no sense
do I advocate evading or defying the law as the rabid segregationist
would do. This would lead to anarchy. One who breaks an unjust law must
do it openly, lovingly (not hatefully as the white mothers did in New
Orleans when they were seen on television screaming "nigger, nigger,
nigger") and with a willingness to accept the penalty. I submit that an
individual who breaks a law that conscience tells him is unjust, and
willingly accepts the penalty by staying in jail to arouse the
conscience of the community over its injustice, is in reality expressing
the very highest respect for law.

Of course there is nothing new about this kind of civil disobedience. It
was seen sublimely in the refusal of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego to
obey the laws of Nebuchadnezzar because a higher moral law was involved.
It was practiced superbly by the early Christians who were willing to
face hungry lions and the excruciating pain of chopping blocks, before
submitting to certain unjust laws of the Roman Empire. To a degree
academic freedom is a reality today because Socrates practiced civil
disobedience.

We can never forget that everything Hitler did in Germany was "legal"
and everything the Hungarian freedom fighters did in Hungary was
"illegal." It was "illegal" to aid and comfort a Jew in Hitler's
Germany. But I am sure that, if I had lived in Germany during that time,
I would have aided and comforted my Jewish brothers even though it was
illegal. If I lived in a communist country today where certain
principles dear to the Christian faith are suppressed, I believe I would
openly advocate disobeying these anti-religious laws.

I must make two honest confessions to you, my Christian and Jewish
brothers. First, I must confess that over the last few years I have been
gravely disappointed with the white moderate. I have almost reached the
regrettable conclusion that the Negroes' great stumbling block in the
stride toward freedom is not the White Citizen's "Counciler" or the Ku
Klux Klanner, but the white moderate who is more devoted to "order" than
to justice; who prefers a negative peace which is the absence of tension
to a positive peace which is the presence of justice; who constantly
says "I agree with you in the goal you seek, but I can't agree with your
methods of direct action"; who paternalistically feels that he can set
the timetable for another man's freedom; who lives by the myth of time
and who constantly advises the Negro to wait until a "more convenient
season." Shallow understanding from people of good will is more
frustrating than absolute misunderstanding from people of ill will.
Lukewarm acceptance is much more bewildering than outright rejection.

I had hoped that the white moderate would understand that law and order
exist for the purpose of establishing justice, and that when they fail
to do this they become dangerously structured dams that block the flow
of social progress. I had hoped that the white moderate would understand
that the present tension in the South is merely a necessary phase of the
transition from an obnoxious negative peace, where the Negro passively
accepted his unjust plight, to a substance-filled positive peace, where
all men will respect the dignity and worth of human personality.
Actually, we who engage in nonviolent direct action are not the creators
of tension. We merely bring to the surface the hidden tension that is
already alive. We bring it out in the open where it can be seen and
dealt with. Like a boil that can never be cured as long as it is covered
up but must be opened with all its pus-flowing ugliness to the natural
medicines of air and light, injustice must likewise be exposed, with all
of the tension its exposing creates, to the light of human conscience
and the air of national opinion before it can be cured.

In your statement you asserted that our actions, even though peaceful,
must be condemned because they precipitate violence. But can this
assertion be logically made? Isn't this like condemning the robbed man
because his possession of money precipitated the evil act of robbery?
Isn't this like condemning Socrates because his unswerving commitment to
truth and his philosophical delvings precipitated the misguided popular
mind to make him drink the hemlock? Isn't this like condemning Jesus
because His unique God consciousness and never-ceasing devotion to His
will precipitated the evil act of crucifixion? We must come to see, as
federal courts have consistently affirmed, that it is immoral to urge an
individual to withdraw his efforts to gain his basic constitutional
rights because the quest precipitates violence. Society must protect the
robbed and punish the robber.

I had also hoped that the white moderate would reject the myth of time.
I received a letter this morning from a white brother in Texas which
said: "All Christians know that the colored people will receive equal
rights eventually, but is it possible that you are in too great of
a religious hurry? It has taken Christianity almost 2,000 years to
accomplish what it has. The teachings of Christ take time to come to
earth." All that is said here grows out of a tragic misconception of
time. It is the strangely irrational notion that there is something in
the very flow of time that will inevitably cure all ills. Actually time
is neutral. It can be used either destructively or constructively. I am
coming to feel that the people of ill will have used time much more
effectively than the people of good will. We will have to repent in this
generation not merely for the vitriolic words and actions of the bad
people, but for the appalling silence of the good people. We must come
to see that human progress never rolls in on wheels of inevitability. It
comes through the tireless efforts and persistent work of men willing to
be co-workers with God, and without this hard work time itself becomes
an ally of the forces of social stagnation.

We must use time creatively, and forever realize that the time is always
ripe to do right. Now is the time to make real the promise of democracy,
and transform our pending national elegy into a creative psalm of
brotherhood. Now is the time to lift our national policy from the
quicksand of racial injustice to the solid rock of human dignity.

You spoke of our activity in Birmingham as extreme. At first I was
rather disappointed that fellow clergymen would see my nonviolent
efforts as those of the extremist. I started thinking about the fact
that I stand in the middle of two opposing forces in the Negro
community. One is a force of complacency made up of Negroes who, as
a result of long years of oppression, have been so completely drained of
self-respect and a sense of "somebodiness" that they have adjusted to
segregation, and of a few Negroes in the middle class who, because of
a degree of academic and economic security, and because at points they
profit by segregation, have unconsciously become insensitive to the
problems of the masses. The other force is one of bitterness and hatred
and comes perilously close to advocating violence. It is expressed in
the various black nationalist groups that are springing up over the
nation, the largest and best known being Elijah Muhammad's Muslim
movement. This movement is nourished by the contemporary frustration
over the continued existence of racial discrimination. It is made up of
people who have lost faith in America, who have absolutely repudiated
Christianity, and who have concluded that the white man is an incurable
"devil." I have tried to stand between these two forces saying that we
need not follow the "do-nothingism" of the complacent or the hatred and
despair of the black nationalist. There is the more excellent way of
love and nonviolent protest. I'm grateful to God that, through the Negro
church, the dimension of nonviolence entered our struggle. If this
philosophy had not emerged I am convinced that by now many streets of
the South would be flowing with floods of blood. And I am further
convinced that if our white brothers dismiss us as "rabble rousers" and
"outside agitators" -- those of us who are working through the channels
of nonviolent direct action -- and refuse to support our nonviolent
efforts, millions of Negroes, out of frustration and despair, will seek
solace and security in black-nationalist ideologies, a development that
will lead inevitably to a frightening racial nightmare.

Oppressed people cannot remain oppressed forever. The urge for freedom
will eventually come. This is what has happened to the American Negro.
Something within has reminded him of his birthright of freedom;
something without has reminded him that he can gain it. Consciously and
unconsciously, he has been swept in by what the Germans call the
Zeitgeist, and with his black brothers of Africa, and his brown and
yellow brothers of Asia, South America, and the Caribbean, he is moving
with a sense of cosmic urgency toward the promised land of racial
justice. Recognizing this vital urge that has engulfed the Negro
community, one should readily understand public demonstrations. The
Negro has many pent-up resentments and latent frustrations. He has to
get them out. So let him march sometime; let him have his prayer
pilgrimages to the city hall; understand why he must have sit-ins and
freedom rides. If his repressed emotions do not come out in these
nonviolent ways, they will come out in ominous expressions of violence.
This is not a threat; it is a fact of history. So I have not said to my
people, "Get rid of your discontent." But I have tried to say that this
normal and healthy discontent can be channeled through the creative
outlet of nonviolent direct action. Now this approach is being dismissed
as extremist. I must admit that I was initially disappointed in being so
categorized.

But as I continued to think about the matter I gradually gained a bit of
satisfaction from being considered an extremist. Was not Jesus an
extremist in love? "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, pray
for them that despitefully use you." Was not Amos an extremist for
justice -- "Let justice roll down like waters and righteousness like
a mighty stream." Was not Paul an extremist for the gospel of Jesus
Christ -- "I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus." Was not
Martin Luther an extremist -- "Here I stand; I can do none other so help
me God." Was not John Bunyan an extremist -- "I will stay in jail to the
end of my days before I make a butchery of my conscience." Was not
Abraham Lincoln an extremist -- "This nation cannot survive half slave
and half free." Was not Thomas Jefferson an extremist -- "We hold these
truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal." So the
question is not whether we will be extremist but what kind of extremist
will we be. Will we be extremists for hate or will we be extremists for
love? Will we be extremists for the preservation of injustice -- or will
we be extremists for the cause of justice? In that dramatic scene on
Calvary's hill three men were crucified. We must never forget that all
three were crucified for the same crime -- the crime of extremism. Two
were extremists for immorality, and thus fell below their environment.
The other, Jesus Christ, was an extremist for love, truth, and goodness,
and thereby rose above His environment. So, after all, maybe the South,
the nation, and the world are in dire need of creative extremists.

I had hoped that the white moderate would see this. Maybe I was too
optimistic. Maybe I expected too much. I guess I should have realized
that few members of a race that has oppressed another race can
understand or appreciate the deep groans and passionate yearnings of
those that have been oppressed, and still fewer have the vision to see
that injustice must be rooted out by strong, persistent, and determined
action. I am thankful, however, that some of our white brothers have
grasped the meaning of this social revolution and committed themselves
to it. They are still all too small in quantity, but they are big in
quality. Some like Ralph McGill, Lillian Smith, Harry Golden, and James
Dabbs have written about our struggle in eloquent, prophetic, and
understanding terms. Others have marched with us down nameless streets
of the South. They have languished in filthy, roach-infested jails,
suffering the abuse and brutality of angry policemen who see them as
"dirty nigger lovers." They, unlike so many of their moderate brothers
and sisters, have recognized the urgency of the moment and sensed the
need for powerful "action" antidotes to combat the disease of
segregation.

Let me rush on to mention my other disappointment. I have been so
greatly disappointed with the white Church and its leadership. Of course
there are some notable exceptions. I am not unmindful of the fact that
each of you has taken some significant stands on this issue. I commend
you, Rev. Stallings, for your Christian stand on this past Sunday, in
welcoming Negroes to your worship service on a non-segregated basis.
I commend the Catholic leaders of this state for integrating Spring Hill
College several years ago.

But despite these notable exceptions I must honestly reiterate that
I have been disappointed with the Church. I do not say that as one of
those negative critics who can always find something wrong with the
Church. I say it as a minister of the gospel, who loves the Church; who
was nurtured in its bosom; who has been sustained by its spiritual
blessings and who will remain true to it as long as the cord of life
shall lengthen.

I had the strange feeling when I was suddenly catapulted into the
leadership of the bus protest in Montgomery several years ago that we
would have the support of the white Church. I felt that the white
ministers, priests, and rabbis of the South would be some of our
strongest allies. Instead, some have been outright opponents, refusing
to understand the freedom movement and misrepresenting its leaders; all
too many others have been more cautious than courageous and have
remained silent behind the anesthetizing security of the stained glass
windows.

In spite of my shattered dreams of the past, I came to Birmingham with
the hope that the white religious leadership of this community would see
the justice of our cause and with deep moral concern, serve as the
channel through which our just grievances could get to the power
structure. I had hoped that each of you would understand. But again
I have been disappointed.

I have heard numerous religious leaders of the South call upon their
worshippers to comply with a desegregation decision because it is the
law, but I have longed to hear white ministers say follow this decree
because integration is morally right and the Negro is your brother. In
the midst of blatant injustices inflicted upon the Negro, I have watched
white churches stand on the sideline and merely mouth pious
irrelevancies and sanctimonious trivialities. In the midst of a mighty
struggle to rid our nation of racial and economic injustice, I have
heard so many ministers say, "Those are social issues with which the
gospel has no real concern," and I have watched so many churches commit
themselves to a completely other-worldly religion which made a strange
distinction between body and soul, the sacred and the secular.

So here we are moving toward the exit of the twentieth century with
a religious community largely adjusted to the status quo, standing as
a tail-light behind other community agencies rather than a headlight
leading men to higher levels of justice.

I have travelled the length and breadth of Alabama, Mississippi and all
the other southern states. On sweltering summer days and crisp autumn
mornings I have looked at her beautiful churches with their spires
pointing heavenward. I have beheld the impressive outlay of her massive
religious education buildings. Over and over again I have found myself
asking: "Who worships here? Who is their God? Where were their voices
when the lips of Governor Barnett dripped with words of interposition
and nullification? Where were they when Governor Wallace gave the
clarion call for defiance and hatred? Where were their voices of support
when tired, bruised, and weary Negro men and women decided to rise from
the dark dungeons of complacency to the bright hills of creative
protest?"

Yes, these questions are still in my mind. In deep disappointment,
I have wept over the laxity of the church. But be assured that my tears
have been tears of love. There can be no deep disappointment where there
is not deep love. Yes, I love the Church; I love her sacred walls. How
could I do otherwise? I am in the rather unique position of being the
son, the grandson, and the great-grandson of preachers. Yes, I see the
Church as the body of Christ. But, oh! How we have blemished and scarred
that body through social neglect and fear of being nonconformist.

There was a time when the Church was very powerful. It was during that
period when the early Christians rejoiced when they were deemed worthy
to suffer for what they believed. In those days the Church was not
merely a thermometer that recorded the ideas and principles of popular
opinion; it was a thermostat that transformed the mores of society.
Wherever the early Christians entered a town the power structure got
disturbed and immediately sought to convict them for being "disturbers
of the peace" and "outside agitators." But they went on with the
conviction that they were "a colony of heaven" and had to obey God
rather than man. They were small in number but big in commitment. They
were too God-intoxicated to be "astronomically intimidated." They
brought an end to such ancient evils as infanticide and gladiatorial
contest.

Things are different now. The contemporary Church is so often a weak,
ineffectual voice with an uncertain sound. It is so often the
arch-supporter of the status quo. Far from being disturbed by the
presence of the Church, the power structure of the average community is
consoled by the Church's silent and often vocal sanction of things as
they are.

But the judgment of God is upon the Church as never before. If the
Church of today does not recapture the sacrificial spirit of the early
Church, it will lose its authentic ring, forfeit the loyalty of
millions, and be dismissed as an irrelevant social club with no meaning
for the twentieth century. I am meeting young people every day whose
disappointment with the Church has risen to outright disgust.

Maybe again I have been too optimistic. Is organized religion too
inextricably bound to the status quo to save our nation and the world?
Maybe I must turn my faith to the inner spiritual Church, the church
within the Church, as the true ecclesia and the hope of the world. But
again I am thankful to God that some noble souls from the ranks of
organized religion have broken loose from the paralyzing chains of
conformity and joined us as active partners in the struggle for freedom.
They have left their secure congregations and walked the streets of
Albany, Georgia, with us. They have gone through the highways of the
South on torturous rides for freedom. Yes, they have gone to jail with
us. Some have been kicked out of their churches and lost the support of
their bishops and fellow ministers. But they have gone with the faith
that right defeated is stronger than evil triumphant. These men have
been the leaven in the lump of the race. Their witness has been the
spiritual salt that has preserved the true meaning of the Gospel in
these troubled times. They have carved a tunnel of hope through the dark
mountain of disappointment.

I hope the Church as a whole will meet the challenge of this decisive
hour. But even if the Church does not come to the aid of justice, I have
no despair about the future. I have no fear about the outcome of our
struggle in Birmingham, even if our motives are presently misunderstood.
We will reach the goal of freedom in Birmingham and all over the nation,
because the goal of America is freedom. Abused and scorned though we may
be, our destiny is tied up with the destiny of America. Before the
pilgrims landed at Plymouth, we were here. Before the pen of Jefferson
etched across the pages of history the majestic words of the Declaration
of Independence, we were here. For more than two centuries our
foreparents labored in this country without wages; they made cotton
"king"; and they built the homes of their masters in the midst of brutal
injustice and shameful humiliation -- and yet out of a bottomless
vitality they continued to thrive and develop. If the inexpressible
cruelties of slavery could not stop us, the opposition we now face will
surely fail. We will win our freedom because the sacred heritage of our
nation and the eternal will of God are embodied in our echoing demands.

I must close now. But before closing I am impelled to mention one other
point in your statement that troubled me profoundly. You warmly commend
the Birmingham police force for keeping "order" and "preventing
violence." I don't believe you would have so warmly commended the police
force if you had seen its angry violent dogs literally biting six
unarmed, nonviolent Negroes. I don't believe you would so quickly
commend the policemen if you would observe their ugly and inhuman
treatment of Negroes here in the city jail; if you would watch them push
and curse old Negro women and young Negro girls; if you would see them
slap and kick old Negro men and young Negro boys; if you will observe
them, as they did on two occasions, refuse to give us food because we
wanted to sing our grace together. I'm sorry that I can't join you in
your praise for the police department.

It is true that they have been rather disciplined in their public
handling of the demonstrators. In this sense they have been rather
publicly "nonviolent." But for what purpose? To preserve the evil system
of segregation. Over the last few years I have consistently preached
that nonviolence demands the means we use must be as pure as the ends we
seek. So I have tried to make it clear that it is wrong to use immoral
means to attain moral ends. But now I must affirm that it is just as
wrong or even more so to use moral means to preserve immoral ends. Maybe
Mr. Connor and his policemen have been rather publicly nonviolent, as
Chief Pritchett was in Albany, Georgia, but they have used the moral
means of nonviolence to maintain the immoral end of flagrant injustice.
T. S. Eliot has said that there is no greater treason than to do the
right deed for the wrong reason.

I wish you had commended the Negro sit-inners and demonstrators of
Birmingham for their sublime courage, their willingness to suffer, and
their amazing discipline in the midst of the most inhuman provocation.
One day the South will recognize its real heroes. They will be the James
Merediths, courageously and with a majestic sense of purpose, facing
jeering and hostile mobs and the agonizing loneliness that characterizes
the life of the pioneer. They will be old, oppressed, battered Negro
women, symbolized in a seventy-two year old woman of Montgomery,
Alabama, who rose up with a sense of dignity and with her people decided
not to ride the segregated buses, and responded to one who inquired
about her tiredness with ungrammatical profundity: "My feets is tired,
but my soul is rested." They will be the young high school and college
students, young ministers of the gospel and a host of their elders
courageously and nonviolently sitting-in at lunch counters and willingly
going to jail for conscience sake. One day the South will know that when
these disinherited children of God sat down at lunch counters they were
in reality standing up for the best in the American dream and the most
sacred values in our Judaeo-Christian heritage, and thus carrying our
whole nation back to great wells of democracy which were dug deep by the
founding fathers in the formulation of the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence.

Never before have I written a letter this long (or should I say
a book?). I'm afraid it is much too long to take your precious time.
I can assure you that it would have been much shorter if I had been
writing from a comfortable desk, but what else is there to do when you
are alone for days in the dull monotony of a narrow jail cell other than
write long letters, think strange thoughts, and pray long prayers?

If I have said anything in this letter that is an overstatement of the
truth and is indicative of an unreasonable impatience, I beg you to
forgive me. If I have said anything in this letter that is an
understatement of the truth and is indicative of my having a patience
that makes me patient with anything less than brotherhood, I beg God to
forgive me.

I hope this letter finds you strong in the faith. I also hope that
circumstances will soon make it possible for me to meet each of you, not
as an integrationist or a civil rights leader, but as a fellow clergyman
and a Christian brother. Let us all hope that the dark clouds of racial
prejudice will soon pass away and the deep fog of misunderstanding will
be lifted from our fear-drenched communities and in some not too distant
tomorrow the radiant stars of love and brotherhood will shine over our
great nation with all their scintillating beauty.

Yours for the cause of Peace and Brotherhood,

Martin Luther King, Jr.
