"Contrasting Concepts of Harmony in Architecture"
 
Lotus International 40 (1983), pages 60-68.  Studio Works 7 (Harvard
University Graduate School of Design), Princeton Architectural Press
(2000), pages 50-57 

Peter Eisenman: I met Christopher Alexander for the first time just two
minutes ago, but I feel I have known him for a long time. I suddenly
sense that we have been placed in a circus-like atmosphere, where the
adversarial relationship which we might have -- which already exists --
might be blown out of proportion. I do not know who the Christian is and
who the lion, but I always get nervous in a situation like this. I guess
it is disingenuous on my part to think that with Chris Alexander here
something other than a performance would be possible.

Back in 1959, I was working in Cambridge, U.S.A., for Ben Thompson and
The Architects Collaborative [Gropius's firm]. I believe Chris Alexander
was at Harvard. I then went to Cambridge, England, again not knowing
that he had already been there. He had studied mathematics at Cambridge
and turned to architecture. I was there for no particular reason, except
that Michael McKinnell told me that I was uninformed and that I should
go to England to become more intelligent.

Christopher Alexander: I'm very glad you volunteered that information.
It clears things up.

Audience: (Laughter)

PE: In any case, Sandy [Colin St. John] Wilson, who was then a colleague
of mine on the faculty at Cambridge and is now professor at the School
of Architecture at Cambridge, gave me a manuscript that he said I should
read. It was Alexander's Ph.D. thesis, which was to become the text of
Chris's first book, "Notes on the Synthesis of Form". The text so
infuriated me, that I was moved to do a Ph.D. thesis myself. It was
called "The Formal Basis of Modern Architecture" and was an attempt to
dialectically refute the arguments made in his book. He got his book
published; my thesis was so primitive that I never even thought of
publishing it.

In any case, I thought that today we could deal with some of my problems
with his book. But then I listened to the tape of his lecture last
night, and again I find myself in a very similar situation. Christopher
Alexander, who is not quite as frightening as I thought -- he seems
a very nice man -- again presents an argument which I find the need to
contest. Since I have never met him prior to this occasion, it cannot be
personal; it must have something to do with his ideas.

Chris, you said we need to change our cosmology, that it is a cosmology
that grew out of physics and the sciences in the past and is, in
a sense, 300 years old. I probably agree with every word of that. You
said that only certain kinds of order can be understood, given that
cosmology. You said the order of a Coke machine is available to us
because of our causal, mechanistic view of the world. And then you
brought up that the order of a Mozart symphony is not available to us.
Don't you think that the activity of the French "Structuralists" is an
attempt to find out the order of things as opposed to the order of
mechanisms, the ontology of things as opposed to the epistemology of
things, i.e., their internal structure? This kind of philosophical
inquiry has been part of current French thought for the last 20 years.
Don't you think that it is something like what you're talking about?

CA: I don't know the people you are talking about.

PE: I am talking about people like Roland Barthes, Michel Foucault,
Jacques Derrida.

CA: What do they say?

PE: They say that there are structures, in things like a Mozart symphony
or a piece of literature, and that we can get beyond the function of
a symphony or the function of a piece of literature to provide a story
of knowledge, that we can get beyond those functions to talk about the
innate structure or order of these things. And that this order has
little to do with the hierarchical, mechanistic, and deterministic order
of the past 300 years. Rather it is based on an alternative to Western
values as determined by metaphysics. This order suggests not so much an
opposition as an alternative view, which suggests that structures are
not dialectical in nature but, rather, that they are made up of
differences.

I was very much in sympathy with the things you were saying in your
lecture. In fact, I would like to think that for the past 10 or 15 years
of my life I have been engaged in the same kind of work. My
postfunctionalist essay in Oppositions 6 proposed an other aspect of
architecture outside of function.

CA: I am not sure I know what you are driving at. See if this is right?
One of the people on our faculty, I think, would probably espouse your
point of view in some way. His attitude reflects a whole school of
thought that has developed -- crudely called Post-Modernism or whatever.
Anyway, there is a school of thought, a serious group of theorists who
have begun to talk about architecture in a quite new way in the last 10
years. And this faculty member says to me, from time to time, something
like this: "Essentially, Chris, they're saying exactly the same thing
you are. Why are you riding your horse as though you are some lone
messenger when, in fact, everybody is talking about the same thing."

But what these Postmodernists and Structuralists are saying is not the
same thing as what I said last night at all. Of course, I think there
are people who are very serious and want to move the many with the
privileged view of architecture that they have in their heads. But words
are very, very cheap. And one can participate in intellectual
discussions, right, left, and center, and you can go this way or you can
go that way. Now then, I look at the buildings which purport to come
from a point of view similar to the one I've expressed, and the main
thing I recognize is, that whatever the words are -- the intellectual
argument behind that stuff -- the actual buildings are totally
different. Diametrically opposed. Dealing with entirely different
matters.

Actually, I don't even know what that work is dealing with, but I do
know that it is not dealing with feelings. And in that sense those
buildings are very similar to the alienated series of constructions that
preceded them since 1930. All I see is: number one, new and very
fanciful language; and two, vague references to the history of
architecture but transformed into cunning feats and quaint mannerisms.
So, the games of the Structuralists, and the games of the Post
Modernists are in my mind nothing but intellectualisms which have little
to do with the core of architecture. This depends, as it always has, on
feeling.

PE: Let us just back off for a minute. I wish we had some pictures here.
I don't want to polarize this between the heavy, Eastern intellectual
and the California joy boy. You cannot ask people, as you did last
night, to believe you because you have done 25 years of intellectual
work -- which I have followed very carefully and which is very
intellectual -- and then say "I am California magic". So I want to get
away from these kinds of caricatures because we are not going to get
anywhere with them. That is number one.

Number two: for you to plead ignorance of ideas that are in current use,
does not make me an intellectual and you not, or vice versa; it means
that you are interested in your cosmology, and I am interested in mine.
So that is a wash. I did not come here to play "do you know" and get
anxious about things. I am very interested in the whole self. In the
Jungian cosmology, you may be a feeling type and I may be a thinking
type. And I will never be able to have the kind of feeling that you
have, and vice versa. We all live with the tyranny of the opposite. So
I don't want to get into that game, because you win all the time. So why
not start over.

CA: Let's have a go. That was a very good first round.

PE: I want to get out of the ring and try again. I came in on the wrong
side. I certainly became the lion and you the Christian, and I have
always wanted to be a Christian.

CA: I appreciate the very charming way you are bringing this into
a slightly nicer state. Actually, with regard to what you said a moment
ago, the business of the feeling type and the thinking type does need to
be talked about. I know something about Jung's classifications. That we
have different make-ups is probably an undeniable fact. But, somehow,
the substantive core of the matter, to me, is the essence of what the
debate about architecture must lead to. If you say: "Well, look, you're
a feeling type, and I'm a thinking type, so let's not discuss that
because we are always going to be on different sides", then it removes
from this discussion what I feel to be the absolute heart and soul of
the matter when it comes to buildings. Now I don't want to deny at all
what you are saying about personalities. But I really cannot conceive of
a properly formed attitude towards buildings, as an artist or a builder,
or in any way, if it doesn't ultimately confront the fact that buildings
work in the realm of feeling. So when you say, "Look you're that type,
and I'm this type, and let's agree not to talk with one another about
that fact", what's the implication? Is the implication that you think
that feeling is not related to buildings? Perhaps you could answer that.

PE: Of course, if you are a feeling type, you would think that feelings
are the essence of the matter; and I cannot help thinking, as a thinking
type, that ideas are the essence of the matter. It is not something that
I can walk away from. We all have a shadow, and my shadow is feeling.
I accept that you are that way. I am asking you to accept me the way
I am rather than dismissing what I say as not being at the heart of the
matter. For you, feeling is the heart of the matter, because it is the
only way you can configure the world. I cannot configure the way you do
because then I would not be me, and you would not want me to do that.

CA: I'm not so sure about that.

PE: It is not I who is into tyranny. Let's see if we can discuss
substantive issues. All I am saying is: do not put people down who
cannot get at ideas through feeling. At least 50% of the people here
cannot.

CA: You're saying to me, on the level of personal decency and
person-to-person respect, let each of us recognize that we have our
different attitudes towards the world, and let's not mix them up with
the central, substantive matter at hand. That's what you're inviting me
to do.

PE: That's what I was hoping.

CA: I will suspend that, if you can deal with that. I fully understand
that what you're saying concerns you, and I'm quite comfortable with the
person-to-person respect, given our different attitudes and so forth.
The trouble is that we also happen to be dealing with a matter that
I believe intellectually is the central issue. Intellectually, not from
the point of view of feeling. It's very, very difficult for me to stay
away from this issue because, if I don't talk about it with you to some
extent, I will actually never know what you're really talking about. So,
if you will permit me, I'd like to go into this matter and see where we
come to. You see, there is a debate going on here, and there is also
a disagreement -- I believe of substance. I'm not even sure whether we
work in the same way. That's why I would like to check out a couple of
examples, buildings. Now, I will pick a building, let's take Chartres
for example. We probably don't disagree that it's a great building.

PE: Well, we do actually, I think it is a boring building. Chartres, for
me, is one of the least interesting cathedrals. In fact, I have gone to
Chartres a number of times to eat in the restaurant across the street --
had a 1934 red Mersault wine, which was exquisite -- I never went into
the cathedral. The cathedral was done en passant. Once you've seen one
Gothic cathedral, you have seen them all.

CA: Well, pick a building you like. Pick another.

PE: Let's pick something that we can agree on -- Palladio's Palazzo
Chiericati. For me, one of the things that qualifies it in an incredible
way, is precisely because it is more intellectual and less emotional. It
makes me feel high in my mind, not in my gut. Things that make me feel
high in my gut are very suspicious, because that is my psychological
problem. So I keep it in the mind, because I'm happier with that.

You see, the Mies and Chiericati thing was far greater than Moore and
Chiericati, because Moore is just a pasticheur. We agree on that. But
Mies and Chiericati is a very interesting example, and I find much of
what is in Palladio -- that is the contamination of wholeness -- also in
Mies. I also find alternation, as opposed to simple repetition. And you
said things which are very close to my heart. I am very interested in
the arguments you presented in your lecture. You said something about
the significance of spaces between elements being repeated. Not only the
element itself being repeated, but the space between. I'm very
interested in the space between. That is where we come together. Now the
space between is not part of classical unity, wholeness, completeness;
it is another typology.

It is not a typology of sameness or wholeness; it's a typology of
differences. It is a typology which transgresses wholeness and
contaminates it. If you say A/B A/B, that is an alternation of wholes
outside of the classical canon, which tries to take A and B and bring
them into symmetry -- as in B/A/B/A/B. In other words, there are three
B's with one in the center, and two A's as minor chords. When you have
A/B/A/B/ you have alternating pairs with no center, closure or
hierarchy. A/B/A/B/A is complete. A/B/A/B is not. What is interesting
about serial structures is the spaces between, not the elements
themselves, but the differences between the two. You were talking about
that last night when you gave an example of something that was not
dealing with wholeness at all in the classical sense. Maybe we would
benefit from talking more about this. Or not?

CA: I don't fully follow what you're saying. It never occurred to me
that someone could so explicitly reject the core experience of something
like Chartres. It's very interesting to have this conversation. If this
weren't a public situation, I'd be tempted to get into this on
a psychiatric level. I'm actually quite serious about this. What I'm
saying is that I understand how one could be very panicked by these
kinds of feelings. Actually, it's been my impression that a large part
of the history of modern architecture has been a kind of panicked
withdrawal from these kinds of feelings, which have governed the
formation of buildings over the last 2000 years or so.

Why that panicked withdrawal occurred, I'm still trying to find out.
It's not clear to me. But I've never heard somebody say, until a few
moments ago, someone say explicitly: "Yes, I find that stuff freaky.
I don't like to deal with feelings. I like to deal with ideas." Then, of
course, what follows is very clear. You would like the Palladio
building; you would not be particularly happy with Chartres, and so
forth. And Mies ...

PE: The panicked withdrawal of the alienated self was dealt with in
Modernism -- which was concerned with the alienation of the self from
the collective.

CA: However painful it is, we are doing pretty well right now. We're not
being rude to each other, and things are moving along really nicely. It
does seem to me, since we have locked into this particular discussion,
that we ought to stay with it.

I want to tell a story that I told this morning. About two or three
years ago, I was asked by the faculty at Berkeley to show some pictures
of things I had been working on, and ended up locking horns with some
people who were challenging my work. I recognized that their comments
were coming from a place similar to that which you were just talking
about, because the things that I make come from a very vulnerable spot.
What happened was, one of the people who has been most vociferous in
this field, a few days later, whispering privately in a corner said:
"You know, I really shouldn't have said those things to you, but I've
been making plans like this myself for some time but dare not show them
to anybody". And this is, I have found, in dealing with various men in
the profession over the last 10, 20, years, quite frequently you have
this theme, where there's actually real fear about simple, ordinary,
vulnerable stuff.

I will give you another example, a slightly absurd example. A group of
students under my direction was designing houses for about a dozen
people, each student doing one house. In order to speed things up (we
only had a few weeks to do this project), I said: "We are going to
concentrate on the layout and cooperation of these buildings, so the
building system is not going to be under discussion."

So I gave them the building system, and it happened to include pitched
roofs, fairly steep pitched roofs. The following week, after people had
looked at the notes I handed out about the building system, somebody
raised his hand and said: "Look, you know everything is going along
fine, but could we discuss the roofs?" So I said: "Yes, what would you
like to discuss about the roofs?" And the person said: "Could we make
the roofs a little different?" I had told them to make just ordinary
pitched roofs. I asked, "What's the issue about the roofs?" And the
person responded: "Well, I don't know, it's just kind of funny." Then
that conversation died down a bit. Five minutes later, somebody else
popped up his hand and said: "Look, I feel fine about the building
system, except the roofs. Could we discuss the roofs?" I said: "What's
the matter with the roofs?" He said, "Well, I have been talking to my
wife about the roofs, and she likes the roofs" -- and then he sniggered.
I said: "What's so funny or odd about that?" And he said: "Well, I don't
know, I ... "

Well, to cut a long story short, it became clear that ... [Alexander
goes to the blackboard and draws different types of roofs]. Now, all of
you who are educated in the modernist canon know that as an architect,
a respectable architect of the 1980s, it is quite okay to do this, you
can do this, you can do this, you can do this, but please [he points to
a pitched roof design] do not do this.

So, the question is, why not? Why does this taboo exist? What is this
funny business about having to prove you are a modem architect and
having to do something other than a pitched roof? The simplest
explanation is that you have to do these others to prove your membership
in the fraternity of modern architecture. You have to do something more
far out, otherwise people will think you are a simpleton. But I do not
think that is the whole story. I think the more crucial explanation --
very strongly related to what I was talking about last night -- is that
the pitched roof contains a very, very primitive power of feeling. Not
a low pitched, tract house roof, but a beautifully shaped, fully pitched
roof. That kind of roof has a very primitive essence as a shape, which
reaches into a very vulnerable part of you. But the version that is okay
among the architectural fraternity is the one which does not have the
feeling: the weird angle, the butterfly, the asymmetrically steep shed,
etc. -- all the shapes which look interesting but which lack feeling
altogether. The roof issue is a simple example. But I do believe the
history of architecture in the last few decades has been one of
specifically and repeatedly trying to avoid any primitive feeling
whatsoever. Why this has taken place, I don't know.

PE: This is a wonderful coincidence, because I too am concerned with the
subject of roofs. Let me answer it in a very deep way. I would argue
that the pitched roof is -- as Gaston Bachelard points out -- one of the
essential characteristics of "houseness". It was the extension of the
vertebrate structure which sheltered and enclosed man. Michel Foucault
has said that when man began to study man in the 19th century, there was
a displacement of man from the center. The representation of the fact
that man was no longer the center of the world, no longer the arbiter,
and, therefore, no longer controlling artifacts, was reflected in
a change from the vertebrate-center type of structure to the
center-as-void. That distance, which you call alienation or lack of
feeling, may have been merely a natural product of this new cosmology.

The non-vertebrate structure is an attempt to express that change in the
cosmology. It is not merely a stylistic issue, or one that goes against
feeling, or the alienation that man feels. When man began to study
himself, he began to lose his position in the center. The loss of center
is expressed by that alienation. Whether understood by modern
architecture or not, what Modernism was attempting to explain by its
form was that alienation. Now that technology has gone rampant, maybe we
need to rethink the cosmology. Can we go back to a cosmology of
anthropocentrism? I am not convinced that it is appropriate.

CA: Let me just inject one thing. This is a pretty interesting subject.
I just want to make one thing clear. I am not suggesting that it would
be good idea to romantically go back and pick up the pitched roof, and
say: "Well, it did a certain job for several hundred years, why don't we
keep it, or use it again?" I am talking about a totally different
language than that.

I think I am going to have to give a rather more elaborate explanation
Up until about 1600, most of the world views that existed in different
cultures did see man and the universe as more or less intertwined and
inseparable ... either through the medium of what they called God or in
some other way. But all that was understood. The particular intellectual
game that led us to discover all the wonders of science forced us to
abandon temporarily that idea. In other words, in order to do physics,
to do biology, we were actually taught to pretend that things were like
little machines because only then could you tinker with them and find
out what makes them tick. That's all fine. It was a tremendous endeavor,
and it paid off.

But it may have been factually wrong. That is, the constitution of the
universe may be such that the human self and the substance that things
made out of, the spatial matter or whatever you call it, are much more
inextricably related than we realized. Now, I am not talking about some
kind of aboriginal primitivism. I am saying that it may actually be
a matter of fact that those things are more related than we realize. And
that we have been trained to play a trick on ourselves for the last 300
years in order to discover certain things. Now, if that's true -- there
are plenty of people in the world who are beginning to say it is, by the
way, certainly in physics and other related subjects -- then my own
contribution to that line of thought has to do with these structures of
sameness that I have been talking about.

In other words, the order I was sketching out last night is ultimately,
fundamentally an order produced by centers or wholes which are
reinforcing each other and creating each other. Now, if all of that is
so, then the pitched roof would simply come about as a consequence of
all that -- not as an antecedent. It would turn out that, in
circumstances where one is putting a roof on a building, in the absence
of other very strong forces that are forcing you to do something
different, that is the most natural and simple roof to do. And,
therefore, that kind of order would tend to reappear -- of course, in
a completely different, modern technological style -- simply because
that is the nature of order, not because of a romantic harkening back to
past years. You probably understand this.

PE: What we have not been able to get at yet is that it is possible to
project a totally different cosmology that deals with the feelings of
the self. Alternative views of the world might suggest that it is not
wholeness that will evoke our truest feelings and that it is precisely
the wholeness of the anthropocentric world that it might be the presence
of absence, that is, the nonwhole, the fragment which might produce
a condition that would more closely approximate our innate feelings
today.

Let me be more specific. Last night, you gave two examples of structural
relationships that evoke feelings of wholeness -- of an arcade around
a court, which was too large, and of a window frame which is also too
large. Le Corbusier once defined architecture as having to do with
a window which is either too large or too small, but never the right
size. Once it was the right size it was no longer functioning. When it
is the right size, that building is merely a building. The only way in
the presence of architecture that is that feeling, that need for
something other, when the window was either too large or too small.

I was reminded of this when I went to Spain this summer to see the town
hall at Logrono by Rafael Moneo. He made an arcade where the columns
were too thin. It was profoundly disturbing to me when I first saw
photographs of the building. The columns seemed too thin for an arcade
around the court of a public space. And then, when I went to see the
building, I realized what he was doing. He was taking away from
something that was too large, achieving an effect that expresses the
separation and fragility that man feels today in relationship to the
technological scale of life, to machines, and the car-dominated
environment we live in. I had a feeling with that attenuated colonnade
of precisely what I think you are talking about. Now, I am curious if
you can admit, in your idea of wholeness, the idea of separation --
wholeness for you might be separation for me. The idea that the
too-small might also satisfy a feeling as well as the too-large. Because
if it is only the too-large that you will admit, then we have a real
problem.

CA: I didn't say too large, by the way, I just said large. Quite
a different matter.

PE: You said a boundary larger than the entity it surrounds. I think you
said too large.

CA: I said large in relation to the entity. Not too large.

PE: Large, meaning larger than it needs be?

CA: No, I didn't mean that.

PE: Well, could it be smaller than it needs be?

CA: Unfortunately, I don't know the building you just described. Your
description sounds horrendous to me. Of course, without actually seeing
it, I can't tell. But if your words convey anything like what the thing
is actually like, then it sounds to me that this is exactly this kind of
prickly, weird place, that for some reason some group of people have
chosen to go to nowadays. Now, why are they going there? Don't ask me.

PE: I guess what I am saying is that I believe that there is an
alternate cosmology to the one which you suggest. The cosmology of the
last 300 years has changed and there is now the potential for expressing
those feelings that you speak of in other ways than through largeness --
your boundaries -- and the alternating repetition of architectural
elements. You had 12 or 15 points. Precisely because I believe that the
old cosmology is no longer an effective basis on which to build, I begin
to want to invert your conditions -- to search for their negative -- to
say that for every positive condition you suggest, if you could propose
a negative you might more closely approximate the cosmology of today. In
other words, if I could find the negative of your 12 points, we would
come closer to approximating a cosmology that would deal with both of us
than does the one you are proposing.

CA : Can we just go back to the arcade for a moment? The reason Moneo's
arcade sounded prickly and strange was, when I make an arcade I have
a very simple purpose, and that is to try to make it feel absolutely
comfortable -- physically, emotionally, practically, and absolutely.
This is pretty hard to do. Much, much harder to do than most of the
present generation of architects will admit to. Let's just talk about
the simple matter of making an arcade. I find in my own practical work
that in order to find out what's really comfortable, it is necessary to
mock up the design at full scale. This is what I normally do. So I will
take pieces of lumber, scrap material, and I'll start mocking up. How
big are the columns? What is the space between them? At what height is
the ceiling above? How wide is the thing? When you actually get all
those elements correct, at a certain point you begin to feel that they
are in harmony.

Of course, harmony is a product not only of yourself, but of the
surroundings. In other words, what is harmonious in one place will not
be in another. So, it is very, very much a question of what application
creates harmony in that place. It is a simple objective matter. At least
my experience tells me, that when a group of different people set out to
try and find out what is harmonious, what feels most comfortable in such
and such a situation, their opinions about it will tend to converge, if
they are mocking up full-scale, real stuff. Of course, if they're making
sketches or throwing out ideas, they won't agree. But if you start
making the real thing, one tends to reach agreement. My only concern is
to produce that kind of harmony. The things that I was talking about
last night -- I was doing empirical observation about -- as a matter of
fact, it turns out that these certain structures need to be in there to
produce that harmony.

The thing that strikes me about your friend's building -- if
I understood you correctly -- is that somehow in some intentional way it
is not harmonious. That is, Moneo intentionally wants to produce an
effect of disharmony. Maybe even of incongruity.

PE: That is correct.

CA: I find that incomprehensible. I find it very irresponsible. I find
it nutty. I feel sorry for the man. I also feel incredibly angry because
he is fucking up the world.

Audience: (Applause)

PE: Precisely the reaction that you elicited from the group. That is,
they feel comfortable clapping. The need to clap worries me because it
means that mass psychology is taking over.

Someone from the audience: Why should architects feel comfortable with
a cosmology you are not even sure exists?

PE: Let's say if I went out in certain places in the United States and
asked people about the music they would feel comfortable with, a lot of
people would come up with Mantovani. And I'm not convinced that that is
something I should have to live with all my life, just because the
majority of people feel comfortable with it. I want to go back to the
notion of needing to feel comfortable. Why does Chris need to feel
comfortable, and I do not? Why does he feel the need for harmony, and
I do not? Why does he see incongruity as irresponsible, and why does he
get angry? I do not get angry when he feels the need for harmony. I just
feel I have a different view of it.

Someone from the audience: He is not screwing up the world.

PE: I would like to suggest that if I were not here agitating nobody
would know what Chris's idea of harmony is, and you all would not
realize how much you agree with him ... Walter Benjamin talks about "the
destructive character", which, he says, is reliability itself, because
it is always constant. If you repress the destructive nature, it is
going to come out in some way. If you are only searching for harmony,
the disharmonies and incongruencies which define harmony and make it
understandable will never be seen. A world of total harmony is no
harmony at all. Because I exist, you can go along and understand your
need for harmony, but do not say that I am being irresponsible or make
a moral judgement that I am screwing up the world, because I would not
want to have to defend myself as a moral imperative for you.

CA: Good God!

PE: Nor should you feel angry. I think you should just feel this harmony
is something that the majority of the people need and want. But equally
there must be people out there like myself who feel the need for
incongruity, disharmony, etc.

CA: If you were an unimportant person, I would feel quite comfortable
letting you go your own way. But the fact is that people who believe as
you do are really fucking up the whole profession of architecture right
now by propagating these beliefs. Excuse me, I'm sorry, but I feel very,
very strongly about this. It's all very well to say: "Look, harmony
here, disharmony there, harmony here -- it's all fine". But the fact is
that we as architects are entrusted with the creation of that harmony in
the world. And if a group of very powerful people, yourself and others
...

PE: How does someone become so powerful if he is screwing up the world?
I mean somebody is going to see through that ...

CA: Yes, I think they will quite soon.

PE: I would hope, Chris, that we are here to present arguments. These
people here are not people who have rings in their noses, at least as
far as I can see, and they can judge for themselves whether I am
screwing up the world or not. If they choose to think I am screwing up
the world, they certainly would not come here. These are open forums.
For you to determine arbitrarily that I am screwing up the world seems
self-righteous and arrogant. I have not had much of a chance to do so
and neither have you. Precisely because I am uncomfortable with those
situations which you describe as comfortable, I find myself having to
live in New York. I do not live in San Francisco, even though I think it
is a nice place. There is not enough grist there for me, not enough sand
in the oyster. And my head starts -- it may be my own psychological
problem -- but thank God, there is a loony bin called New York where
eight million people who feel the way I do are allowed to be!

CA: Actually, New York is not created by that kind of madness. New York
is certainly a very exciting place. When you compare it to Denmark or
Sweden, I fully understand what you are saying. And I sympathize with
you. Your observation seems to me a very reasonable one, objectively
speaking. But that is quite a different matter. It's quite different
from the original question: why should I feel so strongly, why should
I get angry, because you are preaching disharmony? I was trying to
explain to you why I get angry about it.

PE: I am not preaching disharmony. I am suggesting that disharmony might
be part of the cosmology that we exist in. I am not saying right or
wrong. My children live with an unconscious fear that they may not live
out their natural lives. I am not saying that fear is good. I am trying
to find a way to deal with that anxiety. An architecture that puts its
head in the sand and goes back to neoclassicism, and Schinkel, Lutyens,
and Ledoux, does not seem to be a way of dealing with the present
anxiety. Most of what my colleagues are doing today does not seem to be
the way to go. Equally, I do not believe that the way to go, as you
suggest, is to put up structures to make people feel comfortable, to
preclude that anxiety. What is a person to do if he cannot react against
anxiety or see it pictured in his life? After all, that is what all
those evil Struwwel Peter characters are for in German fairy tales.

CA: Don't you think there is enough anxiety at present? Do you really
think we need to manufacture more anxiety in the form of buildings?

PE: Let me see if I can get it to you another way. Tolstoy wrote about
the man who had so many modern conveniences in Russia that when he was
adjusting the chair and the furniture, etc., that he was so comfortable
and so nice and so pleasant that he didn't know -- he lost all control
of his physical and mental reality. There was nothing. What I'm
suggesting is that if we make people so comfortable in these nice little
structures of yours, that we might lull them into thinking that
everything's all right, Jack, which it isn't. And so the role of art or
architecture might be just to remind people that everything wasn't all
right. And I'm not convinced, by the way, that it is all right.

CA: I can't, as a maker of things, I just can't understand it. I do not
have a concept of things in which I can even talk about making something
in the frame of mind you are describing. I mean, to take a simple
example, when I make a table I say to myself: "All right, I'm going to
make a table, and I'm going to try to make a good table". And of course,
then from there on I go to the ultimate resources I have and what
I know, how well I can make it. But for me to then introduce some kind
of little edge, which starts trying to be a literary comment, and then
somehow the table is supposed to be at the same time a good table, but
it also is supposed to be I don't know what; a comment on nuclear
warfare, making a little joke, doing various other things ... I'm
practically naive; it doesn't make sense to me.
