# Is there an Artificial God?

> In honour of Douglas' memory, Biota.org presents the transcript of his
> speech at Digital Biota 2, held at Magdelene College Cambridge, in
> September 1998. I would like to thank Steve Grand for providing this to
> us. Douglas presented this ''off the cuff'' which only magnifies his
> true genius in our eyes. -- Bruce Damer

This was originally billed as a debate only because I was a bit anxious coming
here. I didn't think I was going to have time to prepare anything and also, in
a room full of such luminaries, I thought 'what could I, as an amateur,
possibly have to say'? So I thought I would settle for a debate. But after
having been here for a couple of days, I realised you're just a bunch of guys!
It's been rife with ideas and I've had so many myself through talking with and
listening to people that I'd thought what I'd do was stand up and have an
argument and debate with myself. I'll talk for a while and hope sufficiently
to provoke and inflame opinion that there'll be an outburst of chair- throwing
at the end.

Before I embark on what I want to try and tackle, may I warn you that things
may get a little bit lost from time to time, because there's a lot of stuff
that's just come in from what we've been hearing today, so if I occasionally
sort of go… I was telling somebody earlier today that I have a four-year-old
daughter and was very, very interested watching her face when she was in her
first 2 or 3 weeks of life and suddenly realising what nobody would have
realised in previous ages - she was rebooting!

I just want to mention one thing, which is completely meaningless, but I am
terribly proud of - I was born in Cambridge in 1952 and my initials are D N A!

The topic I want to introduce to you this evening, the subject of the debate
that we are about to sort of not have, is a slightly facetious one (you'll be
surprised to hear, but we'll see where we go with it) - ''Is there an
Artificial God?'' I'm sure most of the people in this room will share the same
view, but even as an out-and-out atheist one can't help noticing that the role
of a god has had an enormously profound impact on human history over many,
many centuries. It's very interesting to figure out where this came from and
what, in the modern scientific world we sometimes hope against hope that we
live in, it actually means.

I was thinking about this earlier today when Larry Yaeger was talking about
'what is life?' and mentioned at the end something I didn't know, about a
special field of handwriting recognition. The following strange thought went
through my mind: that trying to figure out what is life and what isn't and
where the boundary is has an interesting relationship with how you recognise
handwriting. We all know, when presented with any particular entity, whether
it's a bit of mould from the fridge or whatever; we instinctively know when
something is an example of life and when it isn't. But it turns out to be
tremendously hard exactly to define it. I remember once, a long time ago,
needing a definition of life for a speech I was giving. Assuming there was a
simple one and looking around the Internet, I was astonished at how diverse
the definitions were and how very, very detailed each one had to be in order
to include 'this' but not include 'that'. If you think about it, a collection
that includes a fruit fly and Richard Dawkins and the Great Barrier Reef is an
awkward set of objects to try and compare. When we try and figure out what the
rules are that we are looking for, trying to find a rule that's self-evidently
true, that turns out to be very, very hard.

Compare this with the business of recognising whether something is an A or a B
or a C. It's a similar kind of process, but it's also a very, very different
process, because you may say of something that you're 'not quite certain
whether it counts as life or not life, it's kind of there on the edge isn't
it, it's probably a very low example of what you might call life, it's maybe
just about alive or maybe it isn't'. Or maybe you might say about something
that's an example of Digital life, 'does that count as being alive?' Is it
something, to coin someone's earlier phrase, that'll go squish if you step on
it? Think about the controversial Gaia hypothesis; people say 'is the planet
alive?', 'is the ecosphere alive or not?' In the end it depends on how you
define such things.

Compare that with handwriting recognition. In the end you are trying to say
“is this an A or is it a B?” People write As and Bs in many different ways;
floridly, sloppily or whatever. It's no good saying 'well, it's sort of A-ish
but there's a bit of B in there', because you can't write the word 'apple'
with such a thing. It is either an A or a B. How do you judge? If you're doing
handwriting recognition, what you are trying to do is not to assess the
relative degrees of A-ness or B-ness of the letter, but trying to define the
intention of the person who wrote it. It's very clear in the end - is it an A
or a B? - ah! it's an A, because the person writing it was writing the word
apple and that's clearly what it means. So, in the end, in the absence of an
intentional creator, you cannot say what life is, because it simply depends on
what set of definitions you include in your overall definition. Without a god,
life is only a matter of opinion.

I want to pick up on a few other things that came around today. I was
fascinated by Larry (again), talking about tautology, because there's an
argument that I remember being stumped by once, to which I couldn't come up
with a reply, because I was so puzzled by the challenge and couldn't quite
figure it out. A guy said to me, 'yes, but the whole theory of evolution is
based on a tautology: that which survives, survives' This is tautological,
therefore it doesn't mean anything. I thought about that for a while and it
finally occurred to me that a tautology is something that if it means nothing,
not only that no information has gone into it but that no consequence has come
out of it. So, we may have accidentally stumbled upon the ultimate answer;
it's the only thing, the only force, arguably the most powerful of which we
are aware, which requires no other input, no other support from any other
place, is self evident, hence tautological, but nevertheless astonishingly
powerful in its effects. It's hard to find anything that corresponds to that
and I therefore put it at the beginning of one of my books. I reduced it to
what I thought were the bare essentials, which are very similar to the ones
you came up with earlier, which were “anything that happens happens, anything
that in happening causes something else to happen causes something else to
happen and anything that in happening causes itself to happen again, happens
again”. In fact you don't even need the second two because they flow from the
first one, which is self-evident and there's nothing else you need to say;
everything else flows from that. So, I think we have in our grasp here a
fundamental, ultimate truth, against which there is no gain-saying. It was
spotted by the guy who said this is a tautology. Yes, it is, but it's a unique
tautology in that it requires no information to go in but an infinite amount
of information comes out of it. So I think that it is arguably therefore the
prime cause of everything in the Universe. Big claim, but I feel I'm talking
to a sympathetic audience.

Where does the idea of God come from? Well, I think we have a very skewed
point of view on an awful lot of things, but let's try and see where our point
of view comes from. Imagine early man. Early man is, like everything else, an
evolved creature and he finds himself in a world that he's begun to take a
little charge of; he's begun to be a tool-maker, a changer of his environment
with the tools that he's made and he makes tools, when he does, in order to
make changes in his environment. To give an example of the way man operates
compared to other animals, consider speciation, which, as we know, tends to
occur when a small group of animals gets separated from the rest of the herd
by some geological upheaval, population pressure, food shortage or whatever
and finds itself in a new environment with maybe something different going on.
Take a very simple example; maybe a bunch of animals suddenly finds itself in
a place where the weather is rather colder. We know that in a few generations
those genes which favour a thicker coat will have come to the fore and we'll
come and we'll find that the animals have now got thicker coats. Early man,
who's a tool maker, doesn't have to do this: he can inhabit an extraordinarily
wide range of habitats on earth, from tundra to the Gobi Desert - he even
manages to live in New York for heaven's sake - and the reason is that when he
arrives in a new environment he doesn't have to wait for several generations;
if he arrives in a colder environment and sees an animal that has those genes
which favour a thicker coat, he says “I'll have it off him”. Tools have
enabled us to think intentionally, to make things and to do things to create a
world that fits us better. Now imagine an early man surveying his surroundings
at the end of a happy day's tool making. He looks around and he sees a world
which pleases him mightily: behind him are mountains with caves in - mountains
are great because you can go and hide in the caves and you are out of the rain
and the bears can't get you; in front of him there's the forest - it's got
nuts and berries and delicious food; there's a stream going by, which is full
of water - water's delicious to drink, you can float your boats in it and do
all sorts of stuff with it; here's cousin Ug and he's caught a mammoth -
mammoth's are great, you can eat them, you can wear their coats, you can use
their bones to create weapons to catch other mammoths. I mean this is a great
world, it's fantastic. But our early man has a moment to reflect and he thinks
to himself, 'well, this is an interesting world that I find myself in' and
then he asks himself a very treacherous question, a question which is totally
meaningless and fallacious, but only comes about because of the nature of the
sort of person he is, the sort of person he has evolved into and the sort of
person who has thrived because he thinks this particular way. Man the maker
looks at his world and says 'So who made this then?' Who made this? - you can
see why it's a treacherous question. Early man thinks, 'Well, because there's
only one sort of being I know about who makes things, whoever made all this
must therefore be a much bigger, much more powerful and necessarily invisible,
one of me and because I tend to be the strong one who does all the stuff, he's
probably male'. And so we have the idea of a god. Then, because when we make
things we do it with the intention of doing something with them, early man
asks himself , 'If he made it, what did he make it for?' Now the real trap
springs, because early man is thinking, 'This world fits me very well. Here
are all these things that support me and feed me and look after me; yes, this
world fits me nicely' and he reaches the inescapable conclusion that whoever
made it, made it for him.

This is rather as if you imagine a puddle waking up one morning and thinking,
'This is an interesting world I find myself in - an interesting hole I find
myself in - fits me rather neatly, doesn't it? In fact it fits me staggeringly
well, must have been made to have me in it!' This is such a powerful idea that
as the sun rises in the sky and the air heats up and as, gradually, the puddle
gets smaller and smaller, it's still frantically hanging on to the notion that
everything's going to be alright, because this world was meant to have him in
it, was built to have him in it; so the moment he disappears catches him
rather by surprise. I think this may be something we need to be on the watch
out for. We all know that at some point in the future the Universe will come
to an end and at some other point, considerably in advance from that but still
not immediately pressing, the sun will explode. We feel there's plenty of time
to worry about that, but on the other hand that's a very dangerous thing to
say. Look at what's supposed to be going to happen on the 1st of January 2000
- let's not pretend that we didn't have a warning that the century was going
to end! I think that we need to take a larger perspective on who we are and
what we are doing here if we are going to survive in the long term.

There are some oddities in the perspective with which we see the world. The
fact that we live at the bottom of a deep gravity well, on the surface of a
gas covered planet going around a nuclear fireball 90 million miles away and
think this to be normal is obviously some indication of how skewed our
perspective tends to be, but we have done various things over intellectual
history to slowly correct some of our misapprehensions. Curiously enough,
quite a lot of these have come from sand, so let's talk about the four ages of
sand.

From sand we make glass, from glass we make lenses and from lenses we make
telescopes. When the great early astronomers, Copernicus, Gallileo and others
turned their telescopes on the heavens and discovered that the Universe was an
astonishingly different place than we expected and that, far from the world
being most of the Universe, with just a few little bright lights going around
it, it turned out - and this took a long, long, long time to sink in - that it
is just one tiny little speck going round a little nuclear fireball, which is
one of millions and millions and millions that make up this particular galaxy
and our galaxy is one of millions or billions that make up the Universe and
that then we are also faced with the possibility that there may be billions of
universes, that applied a little bit of a corrective to the perspective that
the Universe was ours.

I rather love that notion and, as I was discussing with someone earlier today,
there's a book I thoroughly enjoyed recently by David Deutsch, who is an
advocate of the multiple universe view of the Universe, called 'The Fabric of
Reality', in which he explores the notion of a quantum multiple universe view
of the Universe. This came from the famous wave particle dichotomy about the
behaviour of light - that you couldn't measure it as a wave when it behaves as
a wave, or as a particle when it behaves as a particle. How does this come to
be? David Deutsch points out that if you imagine that our Universe is simply
one layer and that there is an infinite multiplicity of universes spreading
out on either side, not only does it solve the problem, but the problem simply
goes away. This is exactly how you expect light to behave under those
circumstances. Quantum mechanics has claims to be predicated on the notion
that the Universe behaves as if there was a multiplicity of universes, but it
rather strains our credulity to think that there actually would be.

This goes straight back to Gallileo and the Vatican. In fact, what the Vatican
said to Gallileo was, “We don't dispute your readings, we just dispute the
explanation you put on them. It's all very well for you to say that the
planets sort of do that as they go round and it is as if we were a planet and
those planets were all going round the sun; it's alright to say it's as if
that were happening, but you're not allowed to say that's what is happening,
because we have a total lockhold on universal truth and also it simply strains
our personal credulity”. Just so, I think that the idea that there are
multiple universes currently strains our credulity but it may well be that
it's simply one more strain that we have to learn to live with, just as we've
had to learn to live with a whole bunch of them in the past.

The other thing that comes out of that vision of the Universe is that it turns
out to be composed almost entirely and rather worryingly, of nothing. Wherever
you look there is nothing, with occasional tiny, tiny little specks of rock or
light. But nevertheless, by watching the way these tiny little specks behave
in the vast nothingness, we begin to divine certain principles, certain laws,
like gravity and so forth. So that was, if you like, the macroscopic view of
the universe, which came from the first age of sand.

The next age of sand is the microscopic one. We put glass lenses into
microscopes and started to look down at the microscopic view of the Universe.
Then we began to understand that when we get down to the sub-atomic level, the
solid world we live in also consists, again rather worryingly, of almost
nothing and that wherever we do find something it turns out not to be actually
something, but only the probability that there may be something there.

One way or another, this is a deeply misleading Universe. Wherever we look
it's beginning to be extremely alarming and extremely upsetting to our sense
of who we are - great, strapping, physical people living in a Universe that
exists almost entirely for us - that it just isn't the case. At this point we
are still divining from this all sorts of fundamental principles, recognising
the way that gravity works, the way that strong and weak nuclear forces work,
recognising the nature of matter, the nature of particles and so on, but
having got those fundamentals, we're still not very good at figuring out how
it works, because the maths is really rather tricky. So, we tend to come up
with almost a clockwork view of the way it all works, because that's the best
our maths can manage. I don't mean in any way to disparage Newton, because I
guess he was the first person who saw that there were principles at work that
were different from anything we actually saw around us. His first law of
motion - that something will remain in its position of either rest or motion
until some other force works on it - is something that none of us, living in a
gravity well, in a gas envelope, had ever seen, because everything we move
comes to a halt. It was only through very, very careful watching and observing
and measuring and divining the principles underlying what we could all see
happening that he came up with the principles that we all know and recognise
as being the laws of motion, but nevertheless it is by modern terms, still a
somewhat clockwork view of the Universe. As I say, I don't mean that to sound
disparaging in any way at all, because his achievements, as we all know, were
absolutely monumental, but it still kind of doesn't make sense to us.

Now there are all sorts of entities we are also aware of, as well as
particles, forces, tables, chairs, rocks and so on, that are almost invisible
to science; almost invisible, because science has almost nothing to say about
them whatsoever. I'm talking about dogs and cats and cows and each other. We
living things are, so far, beyond the purview of anything science can actually
say, almost beyond even recognising ourselves as things that science might be
expected to have something to say about.

I can imagine Newton sitting down and working out his laws of motion and
figuring out the way the Universe works and with him, a cat wandering around.
The reason we had no idea how cats worked was because, since Newton, we had
proceeded by the very simple principle that essentially, to see how things
work, we took them apart. If you try and take a cat apart to see how it works,
the first thing you have in your hands is a non-working cat. Life is a level
of complexity that almost lies outside our vision; is so far beyond anything
we have any means of understanding that we just think of it as a different
class of object, a different class of matter; 'life', something that had a
mysterious essence about it, was god given - and that's the only explanation
we had. The bombshell comes in 1859 when Darwin publishes 'On the Origin of
Species'. It takes a long time before we really get to grips with this and
begin to understand it, because not only does it seem incredible and
thoroughly demeaning to us, but it's yet another shock to our system to
discover that not only are we not the centre of the Universe and we're not
made of anything, but we started out as some kind of slime and got to where we
are via being a monkey. It just doesn't read well. But also, we have no
opportunity to see this stuff at work. In a sense Darwin was like Newton, in
that he was the first person to see underlying principles, that really were
not at all obvious, from the everyday world in which he lived. We had to think
very hard to understand the nature of what was happening around us and we had
no clear, obvious everyday examples of evolution to point to. Even today that
persists as a slightly tricky problem if you're trying to persuade somebody
who doesn't believe in all this evolution stuff and wants you to show him an
example - they are hard to find in terms of everyday observation.

So we come to the third age of sand. In the third age of sand we discover
something else we can make out of sand - silicon. We make the silicon chip -
and suddenly, what opens up to us is a Universe not of fundamental particles
and fundamental forces, but of the things that were missing in that picture
that told us how they work; what the silicon chip revealed to us was the
process. The silicon chip enables us to do mathematics tremendously fast, to
model the, as it turns out, very very simple processes that are analogous to
life in terms of their simplicity; iteration, looping, branching, the feedback
loop which lies at the heart of everything you do on a computer and at the
heart of everything that happens in evolution - that is, the output stage of
one generation becomes the input stage of the next. Suddenly we have a working
model, not for a while because early machines are terribly slow and clunky,
but gradually we accumulate a working model of this thing that previously we
could only guess at or deduce - and you had to be a pretty sharp and a pretty
clear thinker even to divine it happening when it was far from obvious and
indeed counter-intuitive, particularly to as proud a species as we.

The computer forms a third age of perspective, because suddenly it enables us
to see how life works. Now that is an extraordinarily important point because
it becomes self-evident that life, that all forms of complexity, do not flow
downwards, they flow upwards and there's a whole grammar that anybody who is
used to using computers is now familiar with, which means that evolution is no
longer a particular thing, because anybody who's ever looked at the way a
computer program works, knows that very, very simple iterative pieces of code,
each line of which is tremendously straightforward, give rise to enormously
complex phenomena in a computer - and by enormously complex phenomena, I mean
a word processing program just as much as I mean Tierra or Creatures.

I can remember the first time I ever read a programming manual, many many
years ago. I'd first started to encounter computers about 1983 and I wanted to
know a little bit more about them, so I decided to learn something about
programming. I bought a C manual and I read through the first two or three
chapters, which took me about a week. At the end it said 'Congratulations, you
have now written the letter A on the screen!' I thought, 'Well, I must have
misunderstood something here, because it was a huge, huge amount of work to do
that, so what if I now want to write a B?' The process of programming, the
speed and the means by which enormous simplicity gives rise to enormously
complex results, was not part of my mental grammar at that point. It is now -
and it is increasingly part of all our mental grammars, because we are used to
the way computers work.

So, suddenly, evolution ceases to be such a real problem to get hold of. It's
rather like this: imagine, if you will, the following scenario. One Tuesday, a
person is spotted in a street in London, doing something criminal. Two
detectives are investigating, trying to work out what happened. One of them is
a 20th Century detective and the other, by the marvels of science fiction, is
a 19th Century detective. The problem is this: the person who was clearly seen
and identified on the street in London on Tuesday was seen by someone else, an
equally reliable witness, on the street in Santa Fe on the same Tuesday - how
could that possibly be? The 19th Century detective could only think it was by
some sort of magical intervention. Now the 20th Century detective may not be
able to say, “He took BA flight this and then United flight that” - he may not
be able to figure out exactly which way he did it, or by which route he
travelled, but it's not a problem. It doesn't bother him; he just says, 'He
got there by plane. I don't know which plane and it may be a little tricky to
find out, but there's no essential mystery.' We're used to the idea of jet
travel. We don't know whether the criminal flew BA 178, or UA270, or whatever,
but we know roughly how it was done. I suspect that as we become more and more
conversant with the role a computer plays and the way in which the computer
models the process of enormously simple elements giving rise to enormously
complex results, then the idea of life being an emergent phenomenon will
become easier and easier to swallow. We may never know precisely what steps
life took in the very early stages of this planet, but it's not a mystery.

So what we have arrived at here - and although the first shock wave of this
arrival was in 1859, it's really the arrival of the computer that demonstrates
it unarguably to us - is 'Is there really a Universe that is not designed from
the top downwards but from the bottom upwards? Can complexity emerge from
lower levels of simplicity?' It has always struck me as being bizarre that the
idea of God as a creator was considered sufficient explanation for the
complexity we see around us, because it simply doesn't explain where he came
from. If we imagine a designer, that implies a design and that therefore each
thing he designs or causes to be designed is a level simpler than him or her,
then you have to ask 'What is the level above the designer?' There is one
peculiar model of the Universe that has turtles all the way down, but here we
have gods all the way up. It really isn't a very good answer, but a bottom-up
solution, on the other hand, which rests on the incredibly powerful tautology
of anything that happens, happens, clearly gives you a very simple and
powerful answer that needs no other explanation whatsoever.

But here's the interesting thing. I said I wanted to ask 'Is there an
artificial god?' and this is where I want to address the question of why the
idea of a god is so persuasive. I've already explained where I feel this kind
of illusion comes from in the first place; it comes from a falseness in our
perspective, because we are not taking into account that we are evolved
beings, beings who have evolved into a particular landscape, into a particular
environment with a particular set of skills and views of the world that have
enabled us to survive and thrive rather successfully. But there seems to be an
even more powerful idea than that, and this is the idea I want to propose,
which is that the spot at the top of the pyramid that we previously said was
whence everything flowed, may not actually be vacant just because we say the
flow doesn't go that way.

Let me explain what I mean by this. We have created in the world in which we
live all kinds of things; we have changed our world in all kinds of ways.
That's very very clear. We have built the room we're in and we've built all
sorts of complex stuff, like computers and so on, but we've also constructed
all kinds of fictitious entities that are enormously powerful. So do we say,
'That's a bad idea; it's stupid - we should simply get rid of it?' Well,
here's another fictitious entity - money. Money is a completely fictitious
entity, but it's very powerful in our world; we each have wallets, which have
got notes in them, but what can those notes do? You can't breed them, you
can't stir fry them, you can't live in them, there's absolutely nothing you
can do with them that's any use, other than exchange them with each other -
and as soon as we exchange them with each other all sots of powerful things
happen, because it's a fiction that we've all subscribed to. We don't think
this is wrong or right, good or bad; but the thing is that if money vanished
the entire co-operative structure that we have would implode, but if we were
all to vanish, money would simply vanish too. Money has no meaning outside
ourselves, it is something that we have created that has a powerful shaping
effect on the world, because its something we all subscribe to.

I would like somebody to write an evolutionary history of religion, because
the way in which it has developed seems to me to show all kinds of
evolutionary strategies. Think of the arms races that go on between one or two
animals living the same environment. For example the race between the
Amazonian manatee and a particular type of reed that it eats. The more of the
reed the manatee eats, the more the reed develops silica in its cells to
attack the teeth of the manatee and the more silica in the reed, the more
manatee's teeth get bigger and stronger. One side does one thing and the other
counters it. As we know, throughout evolution and history arms races are
something that drive evolution in the most powerful ways and in the world of
ideas you can see similar kinds of things happening.

Now, the invention of the scientific method and science is, I'm sure we'll all
agree, the most powerful intellectual idea, the most powerful framework for
thinking and investigating and understanding and challenging the world around
us that there is, and that it rests on the premise that any idea is there to
be attacked and if it withstands the attack then it lives to fight another day
and if it doesn't withstand the attack then down it goes. Religion doesn't
seem to work like that; it has certain ideas at the heart of it which we call
sacred or holy or whatever. That's an idea we're so familiar with, whether we
subscribe to it or not, that it's kind of odd to think what it actually means,
because really what it means is 'Here is an idea or a notion that you're not
allowed to say anything bad about; you're just not. Why not? - because you're
not!' If somebody votes for a party that you don't agree with, you're free to
argue about it as much as you like; everybody will have an argument but nobody
feels aggrieved by it. If somebody thinks taxes should go up or down you are
free to have an argument about it, but on the other hand if somebody says 'I
mustn't move a light switch on a Saturday', you say, 'Fine, I respect that'.
The odd thing is, even as I am saying that I am thinking 'Is there an Orthodox
Jew here who is going to be offended by the fact that I just said that?' but I
wouldn't have thought 'Maybe there's somebody from the left wing or somebody
from the right wing or somebody who subscribes to this view or the other in
economics' when I was making the other points. I just think 'Fine, we have
different opinions'. But, the moment I say something that has something to do
with somebody's (I'm going to stick my neck out here and say irrational)
beliefs, then we all become terribly protective and terribly defensive and say
'No, we don't attack that; that's an irrational belief but no, we respect it'.

It's rather like, if you think back in terms of animal evolution, an animal
that's grown an incredible carapace around it, such as a tortoise - that's a
great survival strategy because nothing can get through it; or maybe like a
poisonous fish that nothing will come close to, which therefore thrives by
keeping away any challenges to what it is it is. In the case of an idea, if we
think 'Here is an idea that is protected by holiness or sanctity', what does
it mean? Why should it be that it's perfectly legitimate to support the Labour
party or the Conservative party, Republicans or Democrats, this model of
economics versus that, Macintosh instead of Windows, but to have an opinion
about how the Universe began, about who created the Universe, no, that's holy?
What does that mean? Why do we ring-fence that for any other reason other than
that we've just got used to doing so? There's no other reason at all, it's
just one of those things that crept into being and once that loop gets going
it's very, very powerful. So, we are used to not challenging religious ideas
but it's very interesting how much of a furore Richard creates when he does
it! Everybody gets absolutely frantic about it because you're not allowed to
say these things. Yet when you look at it rationally there is no reason why
those ideas shouldn't be as open to debate as any other, except that we have
agreed somehow between us that they shouldn't be.

There's a very interesting book - I don't know if anybody here's read it -
called 'Man on Earth' by an anthropologist who use to be at Cambridge, called
John Reader, in which he describes the way that… I'm going to back up a little
bit and tell you about the whole book. It's a series of studies of different
cultures in the world that have developed within somewhat isolated
circumstances, either on islands or in a mountain valley or wherever, so it's
possible to treat them to a certain extent as a test-tube case. You see
therefore exactly the degree to which their environment and their immediate
circumstances has affected the way in which their culture has arisen. It's a
fascinating series of studies. The one I have in mind at the moment is one
that describes the culture and economy of Bali, which is a small, very crowded
island that subsists on rice. Now, rice is an incredibly efficient food and
you can grow an awful lot in a relatively small space, but it's hugely labour
intensive and requires a lot of very, very precise co-operation amongst the
people there, particularly when you have a large population on a small island
needing to bring its harvest in. People now looking at the way in which rice
agriculture works in Bali are rather puzzled by it because it is intensely
religious. The society of Bali is such that religion permeates every single
aspect of it and everybody in that culture is very, very carefully defined in
terms of who they are, what their status is and what their role in life is.
It's all defined by the church; they have very peculiar calendars and a very
peculiar set of customs and rituals, which are precisely defined and, oddly
enough, they are fantastically good at being very, very productive with their
rice harvest. In the 70s, people came in and noticed that the rice harvest was
determined by the temple calendar. It seemed to be totally nonsensical, so
they said, 'Get rid of all this, we can help you make your rice harvest much,
much more productive than even you're, very successfully, doing at the moment.
Use these pesticides, use this calendar, do this, that and the other'. So they
started and for two or three years the rice production went up enormously, but
the whole predator/prey/pest balance went completely out of kilter. Very
shortly, the rice harvest plummeted again and the Balinese said, 'Screw it,
we're going back to the temple calendar!' and they reinstated what was there
before and it all worked again absolutely perfectly. It's all very well to say
that basing the rice harvest on something as irrational and meaningless as a
religion is stupid - they should be able to work it out more logically than
that, but they might just as well say to us, 'Your culture and society works
on the basis of money and that's a fiction, so why don't you get rid of it and
just co-operate with each other' - we know it's not going to work!

So, there is a sense in which we build meta-systems above ourselves to fill in
the space that we previously populated with an entity that was supposed to be
the intentional designer, the creator (even though there isn't one) and
because we - I don't necessarily mean we in this room, but we as a species -
design and create one and then allow ourselves to behave as if there was one,
all sorts of things begin to happen that otherwise wouldn't happen.

Let me try and illustrate what I mean by something else. This is very
speculative; I'm really going out on a limb here, because it's something I
know nothing about whatsoever, so think of this more as a thought experiment
than a real explanation of something. I want to talk about Feng Shui, which is
something I know very little about, but there's been a lot of talk about it
recently in terms of figuring out how a building should be designed, built,
situated, decorated and so on. Apparently, we need to think about the building
being inhabited by dragons and look at it in terms of how a dragon would move
around it. So, if a dragon wouldn't be happy in the house, you have to put a
red fish bowl here or a window there. This sounds like complete and utter
nonsense, because anything involving dragons must be nonsense - there aren't
any dragons, so any theory based on how dragons behave is nonsense. What are
these silly people doing, imagining that dragons can tell you how to build
your house? Nevertheless, it occurs to me if you disregard for a moment the
explanation that's actually offered for it, it may be there is something
interesting going on that goes like this: we all know from buildings that
we've lived in, worked in, been in or stayed in, that some are more
comfortable, more pleasant and more agreeable to live in than others. We
haven't had a real way of quantifying this, but in this century we've had an
awful lot of architects who think they know how to do it, so we've had the
horrible idea of the house as a machine for living in, we've had Mies van der
Roe and others putting up glass stumps and strangely shaped things that are
supposed to form some theory or other. It's all carefully engineered, but
nonetheless, their buildings are not actually very nice to live in. An awful
lot of theory has been poured into this, but if you sit and work with an
architect (and I've been through that stressful time, as I'm sure a lot of
people have) then when you are trying to figure out how a room should work
you're trying to integrate all kinds of things about lighting, about angles,
about how people move and how people live - and an awful lot of other things
you don't know about that get left out. You don't know what importance to
attach to one thing or another; you're trying to, very consciously, figure out
something when you haven't really got much of a clue, but there's this theory
and that theory, this bit of engineering practice and that bit of
architectural practice; you don't really know what to make of them. Compare
that to somebody who tosses a cricket ball at you. You can sit and watch it
and say, 'It's going at 17 degrees'; start to work it out on paper, do some
calculus, etc. and about a week after the ball's whizzed past you, you may
have figured out where it's going to be and how to catch it. On the other
hand, you can simply put your hand out and let the ball drop into it, because
we have all kinds of faculties built into us, just below the conscious level,
able to do all kinds of complex integrations of all kinds of complex phenomena
which therefore enables us to say, 'Oh look, there's a ball coming; catch it!'

What I'm suggesting is that Feng Shui and an awful lot of other things are
precisely of that kind of problem. There are all sorts of things we know how
to do, but don't necessarily know what we do, we just do them. Go back to the
issue of how you figure out how a room or a house should be designed and
instead of going through all the business of trying to work out the angles and
trying to digest which genuine architectural principles you may want to take
out of what may be a passing architectural fad, just ask yourself, 'how would
a dragon live here?' We are used to thinking in terms of organic creatures; an
organic creature may consist of an enormous complexity of all sorts of
different variables that are beyond our ability to resolve but we know how
organic creatures live. We've never seen a dragon but we've all got an idea of
what a dragon is like, so we can say, 'Well if a dragon went through here,
he'd get stuck just here and a little bit cross over there because he couldn't
see that and he'd wave his tail and knock that vase over'. You figure out how
the dragon's going to be happy here and lo and behold! you've suddenly got a
place that makes sense for other organic creatures, such as ourselves, to live
in.

So, my argument is that as we become more and more scientifically literate,
it's worth remembering that the fictions with which we previously populated
our world may have some function that it's worth trying to understand and
preserve the essential components of, rather than throwing out the baby with
the bath water; because even though we may not accept the reasons given for
them being here in the first place, it may well be that there are good
practical reasons for them, or something like them, to be there. I suspect
that as we move further and further into the field of digital or artificial
life we will find more and more unexpected properties begin to emerge out of
what we see happening and that this is a precise parallel to the entities we
create around ourselves to inform and shape our lives and enable us to work
and live together. Therefore, I would argue that though there isn't an actual
god there is an artificial god and we should probably bear that in mind. That
is my debating point and you are now free to start hurling the chairs around!

Q – What is the fourth age of sand?

Let me back up for a minute and talk about the way we communicate.
Traditionally, we have a bunch of different ways in which we communicate with
each other. One way is one-to-one; we talk to each other, have a conversation.
Another is one-to-many, which I'm doing at the moment, or someone could stand
up and sing a song, or announce we've got to go to war. Then we have
many-to-one communication; we have a pretty patchy, clunky, not-really-working
version we call democracy, but in a more primitive state I would stand up and
say, 'OK, we're going to go to war' and some may shout back 'No we're not!' -
and then we have many-to-many communication in the argument that breaks out
afterwards!

In this century (and the previous century) we modelled one-to-one
communications in the telephone, which I assume we are all familiar with. We
have one-to-many communication - boy do we have an awful lot of that;
broadcasting, publishing, journalism, etc. - we get information poured at us
from all over the place and it's completely indiscriminate as to where it
might land. It's curious, but we don't have to go very far back in our history
until we find that all the information that reached us was relevant to us and
therefore anything that happened, any news, whether it was about something
that's actually happened to us, in the next house, or in the next village,
within the boundary or within our horizon, it happened in our world and if we
reacted to it the world reacted back. It was all relevant to us, so for
example, if somebody had a terrible accident we could crowd round and really
help. Nowadays, because of the plethora of one-to-many communication we have,
if a plane crashes in India we may get terribly anxious about it but our
anxiety doesn't have any impact. We're not very well able to distinguish
between a terrible emergency that's happened to somebody a world away and
something that's happened to someone round the corner. We can't really
distinguish between them any more, which is why we get terribly upset by
something that has happened to somebody in a soap opera that comes out of
Hollywood and maybe less concerned when it's happened to our sister. We've all
become twisted and disconnected and it's not surprising that we feel very
stressed and alienated in the world because the world impacts on us but we
don't impact the world. Then there's many-to-one; we have that, but not very
well yet and there's not much of it about. Essentially, our democratic systems
are a model of that and though they're not very good, they will improve
dramatically.

But the fourth, the many-to-many, we didn't have at all before the coming of
the Internet, which, of course, runs on fibre-optics. It's communication
between us that forms the fourth age of sand. Take what I said earlier about
the world not reacting to us when we react to it; I remember the first moment,
a few years ago, at which I began to take the Internet seriously. It was a
very, very silly thing. There was a guy, a computer research student at
Carnegie Mellon, who liked to drink Dr Pepper Light. There was a drinks
machine a couple of storeys away from him, where he used to regularly go and
get his Dr Pepper, but the machine was often out of stock, so he had quite a
few wasted journeys. Eventually he figured out, 'Hang on, there's a chip in
there and I'm on a computer and there's a network running around the building,
so why don't I just put the drinks machine on the network, then I can poll it
from my terminal whenever I want and tell if I'm going to have a wasted
journey or not?' So he connected the machine to the local network, but the
local net was part of the Internet - so suddenly anyone in the world could see
what was happening with this drinks machine. Now that may not be vital
information but it turned out to be curiously fascinating; everyone started to
know what was happening with the drinks machine. It began to develop, because
in the chip in the machine didn't just say, 'The slot which has Dr Pepper
Light is empty' but had all sorts of information; it said, 'There are 7 Cokes
and 3 Diet Cokes, the temperature they are stored at is this and the last time
they were loaded was that'. There was a lot of information in there, and there
was one really fabulous piece of information: it turned out that if someone
had put their 50 cents in and not pressed the button, i.e. if the machine was
pregnant, then you could, from your computer terminal wherever you were in the
world, log on to the drinks machine and drop that can! Somebody could be
walking down the corridor when suddenly, 'bang!' - there was a Coca-Cola can!
What caused that? - well obviously somebody 5,000 miles away! Now that was a
very, very silly, but fascinating, story and what it said to me was that this
was the first time that we could reach back into the world. It may not be
terribly important that from 5,000 miles away you can reach into a University
corridor and drop a Coca-Cola can but it's the first shot in the war of
bringing to us a whole new way of communicating. So that, I think, is the
fourth age of sand.
